docs(ai-gateway): AI Gateway 2.0 architecture reference page (#5852)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/ai-gateway/architecture.md

---
title: "{{site.ai_gateway}} architecture"
content_type: reference
layout: reference
products:
  - ai-gateway
min_version:
  ai-gateway: '2.0'
permalink: /ai-gateway/architecture/
breadcrumbs:
  - /ai-gateway/
description: |
  Understand the architecture of {{site.ai_gateway}}, including its control plane and data plane, how AI entities map to {{site.base_gateway}} configuration, and its deployment and multi-tenancy topologies.
tools:
  - konnect-api
---

## How {{site.ai_gateway}} works

{{site.ai_gateway}} uses a hybrid deployment model, separating the control plane from the data plane.

> * **Control plane (fully managed by {{site.konnect_short_name}}, Kong's cloud platform)**: a centralized UI and API to configure AI entities (AI Providers, AI Models, AI Agents, AI MCP Servers, AI Policies, AI Consumers, and more). It distributes that configuration to registered data plane nodes, along with the mutual TLS (mTLS) certificates those nodes use to authenticate. As in {{site.base_gateway}} hybrid mode, the control plane stays out of the data path: by default it doesn't see the LLM, Model Context Protocol (MCP), or Agent-to-Agent (A2A) payloads passing through the data plane. A few opt-in settings can forward payload content to {{site.konnect_short_name}} — see [Node registration and synchronization](#node-registration-and-synchronization).

Reviewer: We should briefly mention that Kong also offers other deployment modes, such as the Enterprise version, to avoid any ambiguity for the customer.

Author: see https://github.com/Kong/developer.konghq.com/blob/74f7684756786e9601671113217677a770783156/app/ai-gateway/architecture.md#deployment-topologies

Author: what do you mean for "enterprise version"? Am I missing something?

* **Data plane (self-managed)**: proxy nodes running in your own infrastructure. They receive AI traffic (LLM requests, MCP traffic, and A2A communication), evaluate it against the policies the control plane distributes, and forward allowed traffic to upstream services. Each node maintains a persistent connection to the control plane to stay in sync with configuration changes.

The following diagram illustrates the high-level architecture:

<!--vale off-->
{% mermaid %}

flowchart LR

subgraph Konnect["{{site.konnect_short_name}} (Kong-managed cloud)"]
  CP["{{site.ai_gateway}}<br/>control plane"]
end

LLMc["LLM client"] -->|chat / embeddings| DP
MCPc["MCP client"] -->|MCP protocol| DP
A2Ac["Agent<br/>A2A client"] -->|A2A protocol| DP

> subgraph Customer["Self-managed<br/>(on-prem or cloud)"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
subgraph Customer["Self-managed"]
```

Reviewer 2: Let's drop on-prem references here. There will be a separate page for how Konnect translates to on-prem.

    references: |
      TBA
  - entity: "[AI Consumer](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-consumer/)"
    description: |
      Represents a downstream client identity for authentication and access control. Holds an API key credential, can be assigned to AI Consumer Groups, and can have policies attached. OAuth-based authentication is enforced through an AI Policy (such as OpenID Connect) rather than stored as a credential on the consumer.
    references: |
      TBA
  - entity: "[AI Consumer Group](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-consumer-group/)"
    description: |
      A logical grouping of AI Consumers for bulk policy attachment and ACL management. Used to control access to Models, Agents, and MCP Servers.
    references: |
      TBA
  - entity: "[AI Vault](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-vault/)"
    description: |
      A centralized place to store or reference secrets (API keys, tokens) used by other entities. Aside from the built-in {{site.konnect_short_name}} config store, an AI Vault registers an external secrets backend (AWS, GCP, Azure, HashiCorp Vault, and others) and resolves references at runtime.
    references: |
      TBA

>   - entity: "[AI Data Plane Certificate](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-data-plane-certificate/)"

Reviewer: should not mentioned it here, not related to AI gateway, just for the DP-CP communcation protocol.

Author: Thought about this, but I'd like to keep the row. We're reflecting the AI entities as described in their own reference pages here. Moreover, the certificate mechanism is described elsewhere in this doc (node registration and synchronization) to contextualize the deployment model. 

Do you still suggest to just remove the row from the table?

Reviewer 2: This is what I was thinking about as well. Should AI DP Certificate be listed as a separate entity or not? It felt like it should, but I'm in two minds now

---
title: "{{site.ai_gateway}} architecture"
content_type: reference
layout: reference
products:
  - ai-gateway
min_version:
  ai-gateway: '2.0'
permalink: /ai-gateway/architecture/
breadcrumbs:
  - /ai-gateway/
description: |

>   Understand the architecture of {{site.ai_gateway}}, including its control plane and data plane, how AI entities map to {{site.base_gateway}} configuration, and its deployment and multi-tenancy topologies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Understand the architecture of {{site.ai_gateway}}, including its control plane and data plane, how AI entities translate into data plane configuration, and its deployment and multi-tenancy topologies.
```

tools:
  - konnect-api
---

## How {{site.ai_gateway}} works

{{site.ai_gateway}} uses a hybrid deployment model, separating the control plane from the data plane.

> * **Control plane (fully managed by {{site.konnect_short_name}}, Kong's cloud platform)**: a centralized UI and API to configure AI entities (AI Providers, AI Models, AI Agents, AI MCP Servers, AI Policies, AI Consumers, and more). It distributes that configuration to registered data plane nodes, along with the mutual TLS (mTLS) certificates those nodes use to authenticate. As in {{site.base_gateway}} hybrid mode, the control plane stays out of the data path: by default it doesn't see the LLM, Model Context Protocol (MCP), or Agent-to-Agent (A2A) payloads passing through the data plane. A few opt-in settings can forward payload content to {{site.konnect_short_name}} — see [Node registration and synchronization](#node-registration-and-synchronization).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Control plane (fully managed by {{site.konnect_short_name}})**: a centralized UI and API to configure AI entities (AI Providers, AI Models, AI Agents, AI MCP Servers, AI Policies, AI Consumers, and more). It distributes that configuration to registered data plane nodes, along with the mutual TLS (mTLS) certificates those nodes use to authenticate. As in {{site.base_gateway}} hybrid mode, the control plane stays out of the data path: by default it doesn't see the LLM, Model Context Protocol (MCP), or Agent-to-Agent (A2A) payloads passing through the data plane. A few opt-in settings can forward payload content to {{site.konnect_short_name}} — see [Node registration and synchronization](#node-registration-and-synchronization).
```

* **Data plane (self-managed)**: proxy nodes running in your own infrastructure. They receive AI traffic (LLM requests, MCP traffic, and A2A communication), evaluate it against the policies the control plane distributes, and forward allowed traffic to upstream services. Each node maintains a persistent connection to the control plane to stay in sync with configuration changes.

The following diagram illustrates the high-level architecture:

<!--vale off-->
{% mermaid %}

flowchart LR

subgraph Konnect["{{site.konnect_short_name}} (Kong-managed cloud)"]
  CP["{{site.ai_gateway}}<br/>control plane"]
end

LLMc["LLM client"] -->|chat / embeddings| DP
MCPc["MCP client"] -->|MCP protocol| DP
A2Ac["Agent<br/>A2A client"] -->|A2A protocol| DP

subgraph Customer["Self-managed<br/>(on-prem or cloud)"]
  DP["{{site.ai_gateway}}<br/>data plane node(s)"]
end

DP -->|LLM request| Provider["AI Provider"]
DP -->|MCP request| MCPs["Upstream MCP server"]
DP -->|A2A request| Agent["Upstream AI agent"]

CP -. "config pull + DP certificates" .-> DP
DP -. "telemetry: analytics, logs, health" .-> CP

style Konnect stroke-dasharray:3
style Customer stroke-dasharray:3

{% endmermaid %}
<!--vale on-->

> **Figure 1**: **Solid arrows** are **user data traffic** — LLM, MCP, and A2A requests flowing through the data plane to upstream services. **Dashed arrows** are **control-plane** traffic — configuration and certificates pulled from {{site.konnect_short_name}}, and telemetry streamed back to it. The control plane never sits in the path of user data traffic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Figure 1**: Solid arrows show user data traffic: LLM, MCP, and A2A requests flowing through the data plane to upstream services. Dashed arrows show control-plane traffic: configuration and certificates pulled from {{site.konnect_short_name}}, and telemetry streamed back. The control plane is never in the path of user data traffic.
```

### {{site.ai_gateway}} and Data Plane Node

An **{{site.ai_gateway}} instance** is the top-level resource you create in {{site.konnect_short_name}} to hold a set of AI entities. A **data plane node** is a single proxy: a {{site.base_gateway}} (Kong's general-purpose API gateway) instance running in {{site.ai_gateway}} mode. Each node registers to exactly one {{site.ai_gateway}} instance and receives its configuration from it (see [Multi-tenancy and isolation](#multi-tenancy-and-isolation)). For how nodes authenticate, stay in sync, and report telemetry, see [Node registration and synchronization](#node-registration-and-synchronization).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### {{site.ai_gateway}} and data plane node

An **{{site.ai_gateway}} instance** is the top-level resource you create in {{site.konnect_short_name}} to hold a set of AI entities. A **data plane node** is a single proxy running in your infrastructure. Each node registers to exactly one {{site.ai_gateway}} instance and receives its configuration from it (see [Multi-tenancy and isolation](#multi-tenancy-and-isolation)). For how nodes authenticate, stay in sync, and report telemetry, see [Node registration and synchronization](#node-registration-and-synchronization).
```

## {{site.ai_gateway}} entities

> The {{site.ai_gateway}} control plane is organized around a set of entities, each with a specific role. Every entity is scoped to a single {{site.ai_gateway}} instance, which stores its configuration and the endpoints that data plane nodes connect to. The instance and its data plane nodes are part of the deployment topology, not configurable entities, so they aren't listed below. Two of the entities reuse existing {{site.base_gateway}} mechanisms rather than introducing new credential types: AI Vault wraps {{site.base_gateway}}'s vault references, and AI Data Plane Certificate wraps its hybrid-mode client certificates — both scoped to the {{site.ai_gateway}} instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The {{site.ai_gateway}} control plane is organized around a set of [AI entities](/ai-gateway/entities/), each with a specific role. Every entity is scoped to a single {{site.ai_gateway}} instance, which stores its configuration and the endpoints that data plane nodes connect to. The instance and its data plane nodes are part of the deployment topology, not configurable entities, so they aren't listed below. Two entities reuse existing {{site.base_gateway}} mechanisms rather than introducing new credential types: AI Vault wraps {{site.base_gateway}}'s vault references, and AI Data Plane Certificate wraps its hybrid-mode client certificates. Both are scoped to the {{site.ai_gateway}} instance.
```

> 
> ## {{site.ai_gateway}} entities
> 
> The {{site.ai_gateway}} control plane is organized around a set of entities, each with a specific role. Every entity is scoped to a single {{site.ai_gateway}} instance, which stores its configuration and the endpoints that data plane nodes connect to. The instance and its data plane nodes are part of the deployment topology, not configurable entities, so they aren't listed below. Two of the entities reuse existing {{site.base_gateway}} mechanisms rather than introducing new credential types: AI Vault wraps {{site.base_gateway}}'s vault references, and AI Data Plane Certificate wraps its hybrid-mode client certificates — both scoped to the {{site.ai_gateway}} instance.
> 
> {% table %}
> columns:
>   - title: Entity
>     key: entity
>   - title: Description
>     key: description
>   - title: References
>     key: references
> rows:
>   - entity: "[AI Provider](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-provider/)"
>     description: |
>       Stores the credentials and endpoint configuration for an upstream LLM service (OpenAI, Anthropic, Bedrock, etc.). It has no effect on its own and produces no data plane configuration until an AI Model references it.
>     references: |
>       TBA
>   - entity: "[AI Model](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-model/)"
>     description: |
>       The primary entry point for AI traffic. Declares which upstream AI Providers to route to and which capabilities to expose (such as chat completions, embeddings, and image, audio, video, and realtime generation). Handles load balancing, retries, and format conversion, and emits the usage and cost telemetry that attached logging policies record.
>     references: |
>       TBA
>   - entity: "[AI Agent](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-agent/)"
>     description: |
>       Exposes upstream agent endpoints with optional Agent-to-Agent (A2A) protocol awareness and telemetry. Can be typed as `a2a` (protocol-aware) or `http` (generic proxy).
>     references: |
>       TBA
>   - entity: "[AI MCP Server](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-mcp-server/)"
>     description: |
>       Exposes an MCP endpoint. Its `type` field selects one of several modes, which broadly cover converting REST APIs into MCP tools, proxying an upstream MCP server, or aggregating tools from multiple REST and MCP sources into a single endpoint. Each AI MCP Server operates in one mode at a time.
>     references: |
>       TBA
>   - entity: "[AI Policy](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/)"
>     description: |
>       Applies governance, security, transformation, and observability behavior (rate limiting, sanitization, authentication, logging) to Models, Agents, MCP Servers, Consumers, Consumer Groups, or globally. Each policy is independent.
>     references: |
>       TBA
>   - entity: "[AI Consumer](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-consumer/)"
>     description: |
>       Represents a downstream client identity for authentication and access control. Holds an API key credential, can be assigned to AI Consumer Groups, and can have policies attached. OAuth-based authentication is enforced through an AI Policy (such as OpenID Connect) rather than stored as a credential on the consumer.
>     references: |
>       TBA
>   - entity: "[AI Consumer Group](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-consumer-group/)"
>     description: |
>       A logical grouping of AI Consumers for bulk policy attachment and ACL management. Used to control access to Models, Agents, and MCP Servers.
>     references: |
>       TBA
>   - entity: "[AI Vault](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-vault/)"
>     description: |
>       A centralized place to store or reference secrets (API keys, tokens) used by other entities. Aside from the built-in {{site.konnect_short_name}} config store, an AI Vault registers an external secrets backend (AWS, GCP, Azure, HashiCorp Vault, and others) and resolves references at runtime.
>     references: |
>       TBA
>   - entity: "[AI Data Plane Certificate](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-data-plane-certificate/)"
>     description: |
>       X.509 credentials that authorize data plane nodes to connect to the {{site.ai_gateway}} and pull configuration. Nodes authenticate using these certificates via mTLS.
>     references: |
>       TBA
> {% endtable %}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{% table %}
columns:
  - title: Entity
    key: entity
  - title: Description
    key: description
  - title: References
    key: references
rows:
  - entity: "[AI Provider](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-provider/)"
    description: |
      Stores the credentials and endpoint configuration for an upstream LLM service (OpenAI, Anthropic, Bedrock, etc.). It has no effect on its own and produces no data plane configuration until an AI Model references it.
    references: |
      - [AI Provider](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-provider/)
      - [Schema](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-provider/#schema)
  - entity: "[AI Model](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-model/)"
    description: |
      The primary entry point for AI traffic. Declares which upstream AI Providers to route to and which capabilities to expose (such as chat completions, embeddings, and image, audio, video, and realtime generation). Handles load balancing, retries, and format conversion, and emits the usage and cost telemetry that attached logging policies record.
    references: |
      - [AI Model](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-model/)
      - [Schema](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-model/#schema)
  - entity: "[AI Agent](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-agent/)"
    description: |
      Exposes upstream agent endpoints with optional Agent-to-Agent (A2A) protocol awareness and telemetry. Can be typed as `a2a` (protocol-aware) or `http` (generic proxy).
    references: |
      - [AI Agent](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-agent/)
      - [Schema](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-agent/#schema)
  - entity: "[AI MCP Server](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-mcp-server/)"
    description: |
      Exposes an MCP endpoint. Its `type` field selects one of several modes, which broadly cover converting REST APIs into MCP tools, proxying an upstream MCP server, or aggregating tools from multiple REST and MCP sources into a single endpoint. Each AI MCP Server operates in one mode at a time.
    references: |
      - [AI MCP Server](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-mcp-server/)
      - [Schema](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-mcp-server/#schema)
  - entity: "[AI Policy](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/)"
    description: |
      Applies governance, security, transformation, and observability behavior (rate limiting, sanitization, authentication, logging) to Models, Agents, MCP Servers, Consumers, Consumer Groups, or globally. Each policy is independent.
    references: |
      - [AI Policy](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/)
      - [Schema](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/#schema)
  - entity: "[AI Consumer](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-consumer/)"
    description: |
      Represents a downstream client identity for authentication and access control. Holds an API key credential, can be assigned to AI Consumer Groups, and can have policies attached. OAuth-based authentication is enforced through an AI Policy (such as OpenID Connect) rather than stored as a credential on the consumer.
    references: |
      - [AI Consumer](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-consumer/)
      - [Schema](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-consumer/#schema)
  - entity: "[AI Consumer Group](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-consumer-group/)"
    description: |
      A logical grouping of AI Consumers for bulk policy attachment and ACL management. Used to control access to Models, Agents, and MCP Servers.
    references: |
      - [AI Consumer Group](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-consumer-group/)
      - [Schema](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-consumer-group/#schema)
  - entity: "[AI Vault](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-vault/)"
    description: |
      A centralized place to store or reference secrets (API keys, tokens) used by other entities. Aside from the built-in {{site.konnect_short_name}} config store, an AI Vault registers an external secrets backend (AWS, GCP, Azure, HashiCorp Vault, and others) and resolves references at runtime.
    references: |
      - [AI Vault](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-vault/)
      - [Schema](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-vault/#schema)
  - entity: "[AI Data Plane Certificate](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-data-plane-certificate/)"
    description: |
      X.509 credentials that authorize data plane nodes to connect to the {{site.ai_gateway}} and pull configuration. Nodes authenticate using these certificates via mTLS.
    references: |
      - [AI Data Plane Certificate](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-data-plane-certificate/)
      - [Schema](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-data-plane-certificate/#schema)
{% endtable %}

```

## Three types of traffic

{{site.ai_gateway}} proxies three distinct types of traffic:

- **LLM traffic**: Client requests to AI Models — chat completions and other text generation, embeddings, and additional modalities such as image generation, audio (speech and transcription), video generation, and realtime streaming — routed to upstream AI Providers (OpenAI, Anthropic, Bedrock, etc.). Handles format conversion, credential injection, load balancing, and cost/token tracking.

- **MCP traffic**: Model Context Protocol requests from MCP clients. AI MCP Servers act as MCP endpoints — proxying an upstream MCP server, converting REST APIs into MCP tools, or aggregating tools from multiple sources into one endpoint — with session management and tool-level access control.

> - **A2A traffic**: Agent-to-Agent protocol traffic between AI Agents. AI Agents act as proxies with optional A2A protocol awareness, emitting structured telemetry tied to A2A semantics (tasks, messages, agents).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{site.ai_gateway}} proxies three distinct types of traffic:

- **LLM traffic**: Client requests to [AI Models](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-model/), routed to upstream [AI Providers](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-provider/) (OpenAI, Anthropic, Bedrock, etc.). Supports chat completions and other text generation, embeddings, image generation, audio (speech and transcription), video generation, and realtime streaming. Handles format conversion, credential injection, load balancing, and cost/token tracking.

- **MCP traffic**: Model Context Protocol requests from MCP clients, handled by [AI MCP Servers](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-mcp-server/). Each AI MCP Server operates in one mode: proxying an upstream MCP server, converting REST APIs into MCP tools, or aggregating tools from multiple sources into one endpoint. Includes session management and tool-level access control.

- **A2A traffic**: Agent-to-Agent protocol traffic handled by [AI Agents](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-agent/). AI Agents proxy upstream agent endpoints with optional A2A protocol awareness and emit structured telemetry tied to A2A semantics (tasks, messages, agents).

```

All three flow through the same data plane and use the same authentication, observability, and policy features.

## How entities become {{site.base_gateway}} configuration

> When you create an AI entity in {{site.konnect_short_name}}, the control plane translates it into standard {{site.base_gateway}} objects — Routes, Services, Plugins (such as `ai-proxy-advanced`, `ai-mcp-proxy`, and `ai-a2a-proxy`), and Consumers — then distributes them to the data planes. The data plane runs AI traffic through the same Route/Service/Plugin model it uses for all {{site.base_gateway}} traffic; there's no separate AI-specific engine on the data plane.

Reviewer 2: @AlessandroSpallina - actually, can we be more specific here? provide some mapping for each entity? We could build some table so users can really understand what's going on. I assume that audience of this might be interested in it.

Author: Reworked this as an explanation instead of a table. The mapping isn't parallel enough to read well in table rows. Also added a small worked example, let me know if you like it.

Honestly I wasn't sure about how transparent we wanted to be to the customer on this internal mechanism

## Endpoint mapping and routing

AI Model endpoints are exposed as ordinary {{site.base_gateway}} Routes with the AI Proxy Advanced plugin attached, which translates the incoming request into the target provider's format and back. A request reaches a provider through its AI Model's targets and load-balancing strategy; {{site.ai_gateway}} has no separate hostname- or port-based routing layer. Each configured target carries its own provider credentials — a static API key, AWS SigV4, Azure managed identity, or a GCP service account — which the data plane injects or signs automatically on the upstream call.

> When multiple targets are configured for a model, the data plane distributes traffic using one of seven load-balancing strategies: `round-robin` (the default), `consistent-hashing`, `least-connections`, `lowest-latency`, `lowest-usage` (by token count or cost), `semantic` (route by prompt similarity), and `priority` (weighted, ordered failover). On an upstream error or timeout, the data plane retries and fails over to another target by default; an optional passive circuit breaker (`max_fails` and `fail_timeout`, off by default) ejects a repeatedly failing target across requests. There are no active health probes. Connections to upstream providers are reused by default, with reuse disabled when traffic is routed through a configured forward proxy. See [Load balancing](/ai-gateway/load-balancing/) for strategy details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[AI Model](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-model/) endpoints are exposed as {{site.base_gateway}} Routes with the AI Proxy Advanced plugin attached, which translates the incoming request into the target provider's format and back. A request reaches a provider through its AI Model's targets and load-balancing strategy. {{site.ai_gateway}} has no separate hostname- or port-based routing layer. Each configured target carries its own provider credentials (a static API key, AWS SigV4, Azure managed identity, or a GCP service account), which the data plane injects or signs automatically on the upstream call.

When multiple targets are configured for a model, the data plane distributes traffic using one of seven load-balancing strategies: `round-robin` (the default), `consistent-hashing`, `least-connections`, `lowest-latency`, `lowest-usage` (by token count or cost), `semantic` (route by prompt similarity), and `priority` (weighted, ordered failover). On an upstream error or timeout, the data plane retries and fails over to another target by default. An optional passive circuit breaker (`max_fails` and `fail_timeout`, off by default) ejects a repeatedly failing target across requests. There are no active health probes. Connections to upstream providers are reused by default, with reuse disabled when traffic is routed through a configured forward proxy. See [Load balancing](/ai-gateway/load-balancing/) for strategy details.
```

Reviewer 2: @AlessandroSpallina - I had an impression that it's always round robin, isn't it?

Author: Checked this against the plugin source directly, it's not always round-robin, that's only the default. `ai-proxy-advanced`'s `config.balancer.algorithm` supports 7 values (`round-robin`, `consistent-hashing`, `least-connections`, `lowest-latency`, `lowest-usage`, `semantic`, `priority`), all configurable today

Reviewer 2: understood

Data plane nodes also stream telemetry (analytics, logs, health) back to {{site.konnect_short_name}}, which powers {{site.konnect_short_name}} Analytics (Explorer and Dashboards) and attached logging policies. By default, this telemetry includes only usage, cost, and latency metadata — not the LLM, MCP, or A2A request and response bodies. Two opt-in settings change that, and both are off by default:

- `log_payloads`, on the AI Proxy Advanced, AI MCP Proxy, and AI A2A Proxy plugins, includes full request and response bodies in what attached logging policies receive (including {{site.konnect_short_name}}-bound ones).

> - `log_blocked_content`, on AI Policy guardrails, forwards only the specific content that triggered a block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `log_payloads`, on [AI Models](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-model/), [AI MCP Servers](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-mcp-server/), and [AI Agents](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-agent/), includes full request and response bodies in what attached logging policies receive (including {{site.konnect_short_name}}-bound ones).
- `log_blocked_content`, on guardrail [AI Policies](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/), forwards only the specific content that triggered a block.
```

{% table %}
columns:
  - title: Isolation aspect
    key: aspect
  - title: Behavior
    key: behavior
rows:
  - aspect: Entity scope
    behavior: |
      AI Models, AI Providers, AI Policies created under one {{site.ai_gateway}} instance are not visible to another.
  - aspect: Telemetry
    behavior: |
      Each {{site.ai_gateway}} instance is assigned its own telemetry endpoint. Behind it, a shared {{site.konnect_short_name}} analytics pipeline attributes each record to the instance by the connecting node's authenticated identity.
  - aspect: Data plane pools
    behavior: |
      Data plane nodes register under a single {{site.ai_gateway}} instance and pull configuration from only that instance.
{% endtable %}

This gives you per-team, per-environment, or per-region isolation.

## Isolation from {{site.base_gateway}}

An {{site.ai_gateway}} instance has its own entity namespace, data plane pool, credentials, and analytics. It does not share configuration with {{site.base_gateway}} nodes or classic {{site.base_gateway}} consumers and plugins. {{site.ai_gateway}} and {{site.base_gateway}} can run in the same {{site.konnect_short_name}} organization without interference.

> {{site.ai_gateway}} and {{site.base_gateway}} can't share a {{site.konnect_short_name}} Workspace: a Workspace subdivides a single {{site.base_gateway}} control plane, so {{site.ai_gateway}} instances can't participate. Isolation between the two happens one level up, at the control-plane boundary — each is its own top-level resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Isolation from {{site.base_gateway}}

An {{site.ai_gateway}} instance has its own entity namespace, data plane pool, credentials, and analytics. It does not share configuration with {{site.base_gateway}} nodes or {{site.base_gateway}} consumers and plugins. {{site.ai_gateway}} and {{site.base_gateway}} can run in the same {{site.konnect_short_name}} organization without interference.

{{site.ai_gateway}} and {{site.base_gateway}} can't share a {{site.konnect_short_name}} Workspace: a Workspace subdivides a single {{site.base_gateway}} control plane, so {{site.ai_gateway}} instances can't participate. Isolation between the two happens one level up, at the control-plane boundary. Each is its own top-level resource in {{site.konnect_short_name}}.
```

## Deployment topologies

> {{site.ai_gateway}} runs in a single deployment mode: **hybrid** — a {{site.konnect_short_name}}-managed control plane with self-managed data plane nodes. Configuration always originates in the {{site.konnect_short_name}} control plane, so there's no self-managed database-backed or standalone DB-less option. Data plane nodes run in your own infrastructure but are configured from {{site.konnect_short_name}} and must be able to reach it; there's no offline or fully self-hosted control plane.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{site.ai_gateway}} runs in a single deployment mode: **hybrid**, with a {{site.konnect_short_name}}-managed control plane and self-managed data plane nodes. Configuration always originates in the {{site.konnect_short_name}} control plane and is distributed to data plane nodes from there.

{:.info}
> {{site.ai_gateway}} requires connectivity to {{site.konnect_short_name}}. There is no self-managed database-backed option, standalone DB-less mode, offline control plane, or fully self-hosted control plane.
```

---
title: "{{site.ai_gateway}} architecture"
content_type: reference
layout: reference
products:
  - ai-gateway
min_version:
  ai-gateway: '2.0'
permalink: /ai-gateway/architecture/
breadcrumbs:
  - /ai-gateway/
description: |
  Understand the architecture of {{site.ai_gateway}}, including its control plane and data plane, how AI entities translate into data plane configuration, and its deployment and multi-tenancy topologies.
tools:

>   - konnect-api

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
works_on:
  - konnect
```

* **Control plane (fully managed by {{site.konnect_short_name}})**: a centralized UI and API to configure AI entities (AI Providers, AI Models, AI Agents, AI MCP Servers, AI Policies, AI Consumers, and more). It distributes that configuration to registered data plane nodes, along with the mutual TLS (mTLS) certificates those nodes use to authenticate. As in {{site.base_gateway}} hybrid mode, the control plane stays out of the data path: by default it doesn't see the LLM, Model Context Protocol (MCP), or Agent-to-Agent (A2A) payloads passing through the data plane. A few opt-in settings can forward payload content to {{site.konnect_short_name}}. See [Node registration and synchronization](#node-registration-and-synchronization).

* **Data plane (self-managed)**: proxy nodes running in your own infrastructure. They receive AI traffic (LLM requests, MCP traffic, and A2A communication), evaluate it against the policies the control plane distributes, and forward allowed traffic to upstream services. Each node maintains a persistent connection to the control plane to stay in sync with configuration changes.

> The following diagram illustrates the high-level architecture:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following diagram shows the data and control plane traffic paths:
```

DP -->|A2A request| Agent["Upstream AI agent"]

CP -. "config pull + DP certificates" .-> DP
DP -. "telemetry: analytics, logs, health" .-> CP

style Konnect stroke-dasharray:3
style Customer stroke-dasharray:3

{% endmermaid %}
<!--vale on-->

**Figure 1**: Solid arrows show user data traffic: LLM, MCP, and A2A requests flowing through the data plane to upstream services. Dashed arrows show control-plane traffic: configuration and certificates pulled from {{site.konnect_short_name}}, and telemetry streamed back. The control plane is never in the path of user data traffic.

### {{site.ai_gateway}} and data plane node

An **{{site.ai_gateway}} instance** is the top-level resource you create in {{site.konnect_short_name}} to hold a set of AI entities. A **data plane node** is a single proxy running in your infrastructure. Each node registers to exactly one {{site.ai_gateway}} instance and receives its configuration from it (see [Multi-tenancy and isolation](#multi-tenancy-and-isolation)). For how nodes authenticate, stay in sync, and report telemetry, see [Node registration and synchronization](#node-registration-and-synchronization).

## {{site.ai_gateway}} entities

> Each entity has a specific role and is scoped to a single {{site.ai_gateway}} instance. Two of them reuse existing {{site.base_gateway}} mechanisms rather than introducing new credential types: AI Vault wraps {{site.base_gateway}}'s vault references, and AI Data Plane Certificate wraps its hybrid-mode client certificates. The following table describes them:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each entity has a specific role and is scoped to a single {{site.ai_gateway}} instance. Two of them reuse the same underlying Kong primitives rather than introducing new credential types: AI Vault wraps a Kong Vault, the same primitive {{site.base_gateway}} uses, and AI Data Plane Certificate wraps a hybrid-mode client certificate, the same mTLS mechanism {{site.base_gateway}} uses for its own data planes. The following table describes them:
```

{% table %}
columns:
  - title: Entity
    key: entity
  - title: Description
    key: description
  - title: References
    key: references
rows:
  - entity: "[AI Provider](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-provider/)"
    description: |
      Stores the credentials and endpoint configuration for an upstream LLM service (OpenAI, Anthropic, Bedrock, etc.). It has no effect on its own and produces no data plane configuration until an AI Model references it.
    references: |

>       [Schema](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-provider/#schema)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - entity: "[AI Model Provider](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-model-provider/)"
    description: |
      Stores the credentials and endpoint configuration for an upstream LLM service (OpenAI, Anthropic, Bedrock, etc.). It has no effect on its own and produces no data plane configuration until an AI Model references it. Can't take a Policy attachment directly; apply governance globally, on each referencing AI Model, or via an AI Consumer Group.
    references: |
      [Schema](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-model-provider/#schema)
  - entity: "[AI Identity Provider](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-identity-provider/)"
    description: |
      Declares inbound authentication (API key or OpenID Connect) for the AI Consumers calling an AI Model. Distinct from AI Model Provider, which manages outbound credentials to the upstream LLM instead. Takes effect only once referenced in an AI Model's `access.identity_providers` array.
    references: |
      [Schema](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-identity-provider/#schema)

```

- **MCP traffic**: Model Context Protocol requests from MCP clients, handled by [AI MCP Servers](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-mcp-server/). Each AI MCP Server operates in one mode: proxying an upstream MCP server, converting REST APIs into MCP tools, or aggregating tools from multiple sources into one endpoint. Includes session management and tool-level access control.

- **A2A traffic**: Agent-to-Agent protocol traffic handled by [AI Agents](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-agent/). AI Agents proxy upstream agent endpoints with optional A2A protocol awareness and emit structured telemetry tied to A2A semantics (tasks, messages, agents).

All three flow through the same data plane and use the same authentication, observability, and policy features.

## How entities become {{site.base_gateway}} configuration

AI entities are a high-level abstraction. When you save one, a dedicated conversion step lowers it into the same {{site.base_gateway}} building blocks classic {{site.base_gateway}} uses (Routes, Services, Plugins, Consumers), and that's what data plane nodes actually run.

> The mapping isn't uniform. Some entities carry over almost directly: an AI Vault becomes a Kong Vault, and an AI Consumer or AI Consumer Group becomes a Kong Consumer or Consumer Group with its credentials and group membership. An AI Model fans out further: it becomes a Service, one or more Routes, and plugins such as `ai-model-selector` and `ai-proxy-advanced`. An AI Provider has no object of its own. It's folded into the `ai-proxy-advanced` target of every AI Model that references it. AI Policy is the most dynamic case: its `type` becomes the name of whichever {{site.base_gateway}} plugin implements it (for example `ai-prompt-guard` or `ai-rate-limiting-advanced`), applied globally or scoped to whatever the policy is attached to.

Reviewer 2: This is great. I will move this section to another document that discusses how konnect translates to on prem.

      Each {{site.ai_gateway}} instance is assigned its own telemetry endpoint. Behind it, a shared {{site.konnect_short_name}} analytics pipeline attributes each record to the instance by the connecting node's authenticated identity.
  - aspect: Data plane pools
    behavior: |
      Data plane nodes register under a single {{site.ai_gateway}} instance and pull configuration from only that instance.
{% endtable %}

This gives you per-team, per-environment, or per-region isolation.

## Isolation from {{site.base_gateway}}

An {{site.ai_gateway}} instance is fully separate from {{site.base_gateway}} control planes: it doesn't share entities, data planes, credentials, consumers, or plugins with them. The two can run in the same {{site.konnect_short_name}} organization without interference.

{{site.ai_gateway}} and {{site.base_gateway}} can't share a {{site.konnect_short_name}} Workspace: a Workspace subdivides a single {{site.base_gateway}} control plane, so {{site.ai_gateway}} instances can't participate. Isolation between the two happens one level up, at the control-plane boundary: each is its own top-level resource in {{site.konnect_short_name}}.

## Deployment topologies

> As of {{site.ai_gateway}} 2.0.X, {{site.ai_gateway}} runs in a single deployment mode: **hybrid**, with a {{site.konnect_short_name}}-managed control plane and self-managed data plane nodes. Configuration always originates in the {{site.konnect_short_name}} control plane and is distributed to data plane nodes from there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{site.ai_gateway}} runs in a single deployment mode: **hybrid**, with a {{site.konnect_short_name}}-managed control plane and self-managed data plane nodes. Configuration always originates in the {{site.konnect_short_name}} control plane and is distributed to data plane nodes from there.
```

Reviewer 2: Let's not mention version here
